<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>Acknowledgments</title>
<meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="default-style"/>
<link href="../styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:ab716dc3-7c3d-4fc9-9c55-4cc6a0edf9ef" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="frontmatter">
<div class="body">
<p class="sp"> </p>
<section aria-labelledby="ack" epub:type="acknowledgments" role="doc-acknowledgments">
<header>
<h1 class="FMH" id="ack"><span aria-label="vii" id="pg_vii" role="doc-pagebreak"/><samp class="SANS_ITC_Stone_Sans_Std_Semibold_B_11">Acknowledgments</samp></h1>
</header>
<p class="noindent">Some sections of this work draw on materials from the author’s previously published work. All are republished or cited either with explicit permission or in accord with the authors’ rights guidelines:</p>
<p class="RFF1">“Humanities Approaches to Interface Theory,” <i>Culture Machine</i> 12 (2011) (by permission).</p>
<p class="RF">“Humanistic Theory and Digital Scholarship,” in <i>Debates in Digital Humanities</i>, ed. Matthew Gold (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2012), pp. 85–95.</p>
<p class="RF">“Non-representational Approaches to Modelling Interpretation in a Graphical Environment,” <i>Digital Scholarship in the Humanities</i> 33, no. 2 (June 2018) (by permission and guidelines), <a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqx034">https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqx034</a> (5300).</p>
<p class="RF">“Information Visualization and/as Enunciation,” <i>Journal of Documentation</i> 73, no. 5 (2017), pp. 903–916, <a href="https://doi.org/10.1108/JD-01-2017-0004">https://doi.org/10.1108/JD-01-2017-0004</a>.</p>
<p class="RF">“Performative Materiality and Theoretical Approaches to Interface,” <i>DHQ</i> (<i>Digital Humanities Quarterly</i>) 7, no. 1 (Summer 2013).</p>
<p class="RF">“Design Agency,” <i>Dialectic</i> 1, no. 2 (2017), pp. 11–16.</p>
<p class="RF">“Digital Ontologies: The Ideality of Form in/and Code Storage—or—Can Graphesis Challenge Mathesis?,” <i>Leonardo</i> 34, no. 2 (2001), pp. 141–145.</p>
<p class="REA">All images are property of Johanna Drucker.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>