<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>4 Interface and Enunciation, or, Who Is Speaking?</title>
<meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="default-style"/>
<link href="../styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:ab716dc3-7c3d-4fc9-9c55-4cc6a0edf9ef" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div class="body">
<p class="sp"> </p>
<section aria-labelledby="ch4" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter">
<header>
<h1 class="chapter-title" id="ch4"><span aria-label="91" id="pg_91" role="doc-pagebreak"/><samp class="SANS_ITC_Stone_Sans_Std_Semibold_B_11">4    Interface and Enunciation, or, Who Is Speaking?</samp></h1>
</header>
<p class="noindent">If a humanistic interface were designed, what would be its distinguishing features and how would it differ from a standard interface used for news, information, entertainment, education, or any other domains? The idea that an interface might expose the workings of its structuring capacity (its enunciative stance)—the creation of subject positions within its modes of address—is far from the realm of common understanding and use. To put this in other terms, if we imagine that an interface is <i>speaking</i> to us, then who is it that speaks? How does their mode of address—formal, informal, familiar, seductive, aggressive and so on—make itself evident and create expectations about our relation to that “speaker”?</p>
<p>Critical discussion of interface is rich and draws on theories of media, user experience, and information design with intellectual tools from multiple fields.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-1" id="chapter4_1" role="doc-noteref">1</a></sup> Reviewing these will provide a way to lay the groundwork for taking the discussion of interface into a dialogue with linguistic analyses of subject formation and seeing how these might apply to graphic dimensions of the interface environment. In addition, we will take up questions about how a humanistic approach might inscribe ambiguity, complexity, and multiplicity of viewpoints to serve interpretative agendas as well as informational ones. This approach links an analysis of interface to the mechanisms by which ideological work is performed in current conventions while also suggesting new features and critical capacities.</p>
<p>One of the themes of this discussion will be the way delusions of agency are produced in interface. In particular, the consumer model of an omniscient individual, gratified through designs meant to emphasize <i>im</i>mediacy and transparency, might be considered at odds with the ethical and political identification of subject positionality. If we are subjects of our own <span aria-label="92" id="pg_92" role="doc-pagebreak"/>experience, situated within the conditions of our own identity formation and its illusions, then what is an interface <i>doing</i> as it enables the mediating process of transaction and exchange? How are we inscribed within it? In spite of all of the concerns about privacy and information gathering, individual users are barely aware of the way their identities as information personae are being constructed. Such instrumental concerns are still far from the questions of how the graphical structure of interface design works to produce subject positions. But as surely as we understand something about our identities through a relation to the scale of doorways, chairs, rooms, and other objects in physical space, we also experience our identity through the structure and scale of virtual and digital spaces. An interface structures what we may say/see/hear and how we may navigate in ways that subtly and not so subtly construct our sense of possibility. How might we formulate an approach to interface design that begins with these theoretical issues?</p>
<p>The motivation here is simple. The authoring and reading environments for interpretative scholarly work are only just beginning to be designed in such a way that the linear, finite conventions of print media can be changed for the constellationary, distributed, multifaceted modes of digital media. Early visions of a “multiverse” within digital environments have not materialized. As this process develops, a challenge for humanists is to reflect on and articulate the theory of interface that underlies the design of our working environments.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-2" id="chapter4_2" role="doc-noteref">2</a></sup> Using principles of interface theory, frame analysis, and enunciation, we can consider ways to structure and reveal interpretation in a screen environment. The terms of formal analysis (basic features such as proximity, overlap, hierarchy, dependency, navigation, and sequence) are insufficient without a model of the subject and agency. How does enunciation become structured in the graphical interface and communicate a model of the subject in the process?</p>
<p>A crucial distinction will weave through this discussion. I am sketching a contrast between an engineering approach that seeks to “optimize” user experience when that user is conceived of as a consumer, and the alternative approach. By contrast, this tries to call attention to the structuring features of power, ideology, and subject positionality at the basic level of the framing operation of interface design. Interface situates us in a mediating relation to information, communication, and experience. It also provides a platform for interpretative work in knowledge production. These positions will be identified in the contrast of the use of the term “user” for the first <span aria-label="93" id="pg_93" role="doc-pagebreak"/>and “subject” for the second. Interface, in this approach, is construed as the site of “understanding” central to critical hermeneutics.</p>
<p>Though we still have some way to go before arriving at the graphical conventions that will serve our purpose, the intellectual basis for this design is within reach. So is the formulation of this theoretical foundation: the constructivist subject of the digital platform emerges in a codependent relation with its structuring features. This is the “subject of interface” when interface is conceived as a dynamic space of relations, rather than as a “thing.”<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-3" id="chapter4_3" role="doc-noteref">3</a></sup></p>
<section epub:type="division">
<h2 class="head a-head"><samp class="SANS_ITC_Stone_Sans_Std_Semibold_B_11">Defining interface</samp></h2>
<p class="noindent">What is an interface? The term can be broadly construed to include almost any environment for mediating tasks, activities, communication, or user experience from bathroom taps to airplane cockpit dashboards and gaming controls. At a TED conference in 2006, Jefferson Han demonstrated an NUI—a “natural user interface”—meant to suggest a future mode of engagement through multitouch, haptic, features.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-4" id="chapter4_4" role="doc-noteref">4</a></sup> The idea was that such an interface might be projected onto a surface or object, activated by direct manipulation, and work without being limited to a single device or screen. The demonstration showed him pinching and shaping a glutinous mass with his fingers as if the movements of his hands were being transferred directly through a screen—as if there were no screen. Another demonstration by a Korean company, Celluon, showed the projection of a keypad onto someone’s hand and the direct activation of it through touch.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-5" id="chapter4_5" role="doc-noteref">5</a></sup> You become your own phone and the line between mediation and <i>immediation</i> disappears. More recent versions of NUI have been developed on “bump tables” that allow for handling of surrogates for objects and documents by extending the already familiar features of swipe and pinch. The NUI starts to come close to an early vision of a pioneer designer, Don Norman. He “envisaged an ideal ‘invisible computer’ with an interface that would allow human-computer communication to be as trauma-free as possible. By constantly adjusting to the specific operating logic of humans and machines, the space between user and technology would become an empty space.”<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-6" id="chapter4_6" role="doc-noteref">6</a></sup></p>
<p>Whatever way these conventions evolve, the NUI is anything but a “natural” object. That very designation feels quite Orwellian, given the complicated infrastructure involved—and involving its users. The identity of an interface remains a question—<i>what is it?</i>—even while descriptions borrow <span aria-label="94" id="pg_94" role="doc-pagebreak"/>from paradigms that construe it as a space, a thing, and a process. Understanding the arguments for these characterizations lays the foundation for a critical humanities approach that also addresses the illusions of agency built into the standard GUI. These illusions are not just the expression of engineering efficiency, but are rooted in other motivations for transparency. The cultural imprint of this engineering approach to user experience remains one of the contributing factors in the historical development of expectations for interface. The assumptions about who users are and what the goals of the interface should be have not been fully questioned by humanistic principles. Even progressive organizations and projects—I am thinking for instance of Mukurtu, a platform designed to serve indigenous communities in web-based presentations of archival materials—limit their modifications to questions of intellectual permission and control of content, not to the ideological effects of structuring features.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-7" id="chapter4_7" role="doc-noteref">7</a></sup></p>
<p>How did we get here?<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-8" id="chapter4_8" role="doc-noteref">8</a></sup> Interface is a relatively recent concept, and use of the term appears to rise only in the 1960s, with scant mention in the decades prior.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-9" id="chapter4_9" role="doc-noteref">9</a></sup> Pioneering work involved virtual flight simulators, head gear, foot pedals, and other devices that disciplined the body. Ivan Sutherland and Douglas Engelbart, two of the pioneering figures in the field as it began to emerge in the 1960s, realized that the challenge of human computer interaction was to get human beings to have real-time relationships with these “machines.”<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-10" id="chapter4_10" role="doc-noteref">10</a></sup> Engelbart designed the mouse, and worked with engineers to calibrate the reaction time of objects on the screen and the movements of the hand.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-11" id="chapter4_11" role="doc-noteref">11</a></sup> The design of interface ever since has involved the challenges of providing satisfying responses, sounds, and rewards to correlate interaction and results.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-12" id="chapter4_12" role="doc-noteref">12</a></sup> Interface design is largely driven by values of efficiency and ease of use, and is focused on feedback loops that minimize frustration and maximize satisfaction with mouse clicks, joy sticks, and bells or whistles.</p>
<p>The visual aspect of graphical interface connects it to the embodied condition of users, a fact that was evident even in the early days when Engelbart and Sutherland were struggling to figure out how to use hands, feet, body movements, and orientation to the screen as part of the basic computational apparatus. The tactical, haptic, and acoustic aspects of interface have only intensified in the intervening years, though the graphical features that organize interface remain essential to our use of digital environments. Most recently, the American Psychological Association has become concerned with the addictive character of game and other online interfaces <span aria-label="95" id="pg_95" role="doc-pagebreak"/>and their effect on children.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-13" id="chapter4_13" role="doc-noteref">13</a></sup> We have been all too successful, it seems, in creating environments that satisfy their “users” in immediate and absorbing modes. Do these serve the humanities and its critical agenda? Not in their present form.</p>
</section>
<section epub:type="division">
<h2 class="head a-head"><samp class="SANS_ITC_Stone_Sans_Std_Semibold_B_11">Interface theory</samp></h2>
<p class="noindent">If we think of interface as a thing, an entity, a fixed or determined structure that supports certain activities, it tends to reify in the same way as a book, which we so often take for a static physical object.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-14" id="chapter4_14" role="doc-noteref">14</a></sup> But we know that a codex book is a dynamic object, not a static thing. It works through a structured set of codes that supports or provokes an interpretation that is itself performative. Interface theory also has to take into account the user/viewer, as a situated and embodied subject, and the affordances of a graphical environment that mediates intellectual and cognitive activities. Roger Chartier referenced this concept of embodiment as the “engagement of body, inscription in space, relation to oneself and others.”<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-15" id="chapter4_15" role="doc-noteref">15</a></sup> In “The Places of Books in the Age of Electronic Reproduction,” Geoff Nunberg cited earlier work by Chartier and made his observations about embodiment relevant to the then still very new questions of electronic surrogates and displays.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-16" id="chapter4_16" role="doc-noteref">16</a></sup> Recognizing embodiment, though important, only gives us a place from which to begin thinking about cognitive processing. It does not supply a basis for a critical theory of interface. Almost thirty years ago, Brenda Laurel defined interface as a surface where the necessary contact between interactors and tasks allowed functions to be performed.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-17" id="chapter4_17" role="doc-noteref">17</a></sup> She noted, as well, that these were sites of power and control, infusing her theoretical insight with a critical edge lacking from the engineering sensibility of most of the human-computer interaction (HCI) community. And in 1989, Norman Long, a sociologist responsible for social interface theory, described it as “a critical point of interaction between life worlds.”</p>
<p>More recently, Alex Galloway (2012) has suggested that we consider a process-oriented approach. Critic Patrick Jagoda summarized Galloway’s work this way:</p>
<blockquote>
<p class="EXO">Considering the interface as an autonomous zone of aesthetic activity, guided by its own logic and its own ends, [Galloway describes] <i>the interface effect</i>. Rather than praising user-friendly interfaces that work well, or castigating those that work poorly, [his work] considers the unworkable nature of all interfaces, from <span aria-label="96" id="pg_96" role="doc-pagebreak"/>windows and doors to screens and keyboards. Considered allegorically, such thresholds do not so much tell the story of their own operations but beckon outward into the realm of social and political life, and in so doing ask a question to which the political interpretation of interfaces is the only coherent answer.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-18" id="chapter4_18" role="doc-noteref">18</a></sup> An interface, Galloway argues, is not a stable object; it is a multiplicity of processes. In other words, an interface is not merely a laptop LCD or a television screen. It is not the Windows 8 operating system or Mac OS X. It is not a hyper-mediated heads-up display of the contemporary videogame with its myriad forms of information (health levels, map position, speed, time, messaging options, and so on). Galloway mentions many such objects in <i>The Interface Effect,</i> but does not dwell on them. In the first place, he observes, media studies scholars have too often privileged screens and displays. This disproportionate focus on visual interfaces ignores other critical objects, such as “non-optical interfaces” (keyboard, mouse, controller, sensor); data in memory and data on disk; executable algorithms; networking technologies and protocols; and the list continues.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-19" id="chapter4_19" role="doc-noteref">19</a></sup></p>
</blockquote>
<p>From this perspective, we can see that interface is a dynamic space, a zone in which reading takes place and in which ideological operations are concealed. We do not look through it (in spite of the overwhelming force of the “windows” metaphor) or past it. The desktop metaphor at least suggests a space of activity in which icons stand for objects with behaviors we enact, but it is also a screen that provides an illusion. The desktop makes us believe we are seeing the workings of the system, but the metaphors are not the system structure or architecture. The surface of the screen is not a portal for access to something that lies beyond or behind this display, it is an illusion. Intellectual content and activities do not exist independent of these embodied representations, however, and the metaphors also matter. Interface, like any other component of computational systems, is an artifact of complex processes and protocols, a zone in which our behaviors and actions take place. To reiterate, interface functions as the site of <i>understanding</i>, setting conditions for the ongoing negotiation of subject and experience.</p>
<p>If we attempt to separate what we think of as “content” from the wireframes and display techniques, then we are naive. We cannot read content independently on a screen any more than we do when we read the newspaper. If we strip away the graphical codes of a printed text—put its letters and words into a simple sequence, remove paragraphing, hierarchies, word spacing—then we see how dependent we are on these format elements as an integral part of meaning production. They are part of the content, signaling distinctions and embodying codes of reading. These features perform <span aria-label="97" id="pg_97" role="doc-pagebreak"/>a quasi-semantic function, not merely a formal or syntactic one. The specific qualities of the encoding that distinguish the many modalities of the electronic environment intensify the process of jumping from one frame and media type to another. Distinctions among modes (by this I mean the ways we sort out whether something is an advertisement, editorial copy, or something else, as well as distinguish audio from video, etc.) are largely signaled by various graphical and formal codes that are readily recognized through their conventions.</p>
<p>Within the mainstream HCI community, however, interface is approached through an engineering sensibility driven by mechanistic pragmatism. At its best, this approach is highly and usefully analytic, as exemplified in a much-cited graphic by Jesse James Garrett.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-20" id="chapter4_20" role="doc-noteref">20</a></sup> This presented the elements of user experience as a duality between the web as an information space and as a task-supporting environment. His observation that the difference between these conceptions leads to confusion in design has fundamental implications for interface. Garrett’s insight gets to the basic tension between the display of a rational organization of content (images, documents, “about” pages) and the need to balance this with an intuitive guide to the behaviors users engage in to use that content (search, filter, browse, etc.). An interface does not just show what the content is in a site, but instead, organizes a way for it to be used. Interface is the space between these two: neither the transparent and self-evident map of content elements and their relations, nor simply a set of tasks. Garrett’s scheme of organization provides an essential insight, but a full theory of interface goes beyond the design of information structures and tasks into the realization that these are only the armature, not the essence of that space of provocation in which the performative event takes place.</p>
<p>An interface, therefore, is not so much a “between” space as it is the mediating environment that makes the experience, a “critical zone that constitutes a user experience.” I don’t access “data” through a web page; I access a web page that is structured so I can perform certain kinds of queries or searches. We know that the structure of an interface <i>is</i> information, not merely a means of access to it. I may use the search and the query boxes, click on links or drop-down menus as if they are merely a means to an end. But each structure has implications. Sliders, for instance, create a smooth continuum of values. A dialogue box requiring numbers imposes a model of discrete values. When we are looking for dates for travel, it will make an enormous difference whether we are able to state our request in discrete or continuous <span aria-label="98" id="pg_98" role="doc-pagebreak"/>terms. Interface designers are constantly determining which strategies to use appropriately and effectively. The design of interface is permeated by analytic techniques, and excellent guides to effective interface take into account short- and long-term memory, cognitive capacities, and other fundamentals produced according to the rigors of empirical experiment and user trials.</p>
<p>Interface design also draws on cultural analysis and recognition of differences in symbolic, semantic, and behavioral attitudes. Early work in this realm was done by Aaron Marcus and Associates that studies front pages and their relation to various cultural factors.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-21" id="chapter4_21" role="doc-noteref">21</a></sup> Building on work by sociologist Geert Hofstede, they looked at the ways cultural value systems are expressed in web design and need to be taken into account. Hofstede’s categories are open to contestation, but they provided a way to look at design features. Different cultural groups have different degrees of tolerance for ambiguity and uncertainty, Hofstede’s research asserted, they give greater value to individualism or show a preference for collectivism, or register different degrees of dissatisfaction with inequalities in power relations. These features find expression in the graphic organization of information. Interactions with interface would, presumably, exhibit some similar features. Marcus’s group did not look at navigation through information structures or at the web architecture to see if these contrasts had implications for use. They remained focused on iconography and layout. But navigation paths, search and query results, browse features—in brief, every aspect of the web content management and display embodies values that are inherent to the reading process, even if they are largely ignored or treated as transparent, neutral, or invisible. Concern with accessibility across a range of human conditions has also prompted self-conscious reflection on the often taken-for-granted aspects of interface design including color, sound, text-to-voice, and remediating features used to compensate for physical impairments. These considerations are important for their work in undoing assumptions of universal users, and the emphasis on embodied and specific individuals challenges conventions and norms in productive ways.</p>
<p>Nonetheless, for the most part HCI designers work to produce effective environments, ones in which satisfactions are balanced with frustrations and efficiency can be maximized. Their focus is on the literal structure of the design, the placement of buttons, amount of time it takes to perform a task, how we move through screens, and so on. Take a typical example of how-to instructions on design: “The Theory Behind Visual Interface <span aria-label="99" id="pg_99" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Design” (2002), by Mauro Marinilli, lays out a comprehensive mechanistic approach to the stages of action involved, from “forming an intention” and “specifying an action” to “evaluating the outcome.”<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-22" id="chapter4_22" role="doc-noteref">22</a></sup> Marinilli’s approach reflects on the design process in relation to a concept of “user experience” that attempts to map structure and effect directly. This is akin to doing close readings of a text’s formal features as if that explained the full meaning of a text. This approach to textual analysis, associated with New Criticism in the early decades of the twentieth century, is no longer considered adequate to address the broader issues of cultural difference and individual acts of meaning production.</p>
<p>How do we move beyond a theory of interface based on the “user experience” approach, with its mechanistic emphasis on efficient accomplishment of tasks and concept of the user as an autonomous agent controlled by feedback loops, to one grounded in a theory of the subject? Challenges to the user-based conception arise when we imagine interface engaging with an activity that may or may not be goal oriented, highly structured, and/or driven by an immediate outcome. Consider the diversionary experience of wandering, browsing, meandering, or prolonging engagement for the purpose of pleasure, keeping boredom at bay, indulging in idle distraction, or time squandering. Reading, researching, following trails of association are not necessarily aimed toward efficiency or completion. Artists working online, such as writers represented in the Electronic Literature Organization archive, for instance, are not necessarily interested in <i>efficient</i> design, but rather <i>experiential</i> design.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-23" id="chapter4_23" role="doc-noteref">23</a></sup> The same can be said of porn sites. Some radical interventions, such as those created by the art collective jodi.org (created in 1994 by Joan Heemskirk and Dirk Paesmans to subvert expectations of web-based experience through software modifications), directly challenged the engineering paradigm. These aesthetic dimensions, like scholarly pursuits, make interface a space of being and dwelling, not a realm of control panels and instruments only existing to be put at the service of something else. I bring up these contrasting communities because they shatter the illusion of interface as a thing, immediately making it clear that a theory of interface can’t be constructed around expectations of performance or tasks or even behaviors.</p>
<p>As long as we think of interface as an environment for performing tasks, we do not approach the question of what other kind of work experience might be constructed. Ben Shneiderman’s mantra, “Overview first, zoom and filter, details on demand,” assumes that one is working in a <span aria-label="100" id="pg_100" role="doc-pagebreak"/>very restricted, highly structured, and discrete environment toward a very limited outcome.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-24" id="chapter4_24" role="doc-noteref">24</a></sup> Shneiderman’s user is a <i>consumer</i>, not a <i>producer</i>, and certainly not a <i>subject</i>. We can track Shneiderman’s attitude from the innovative beginnings of a robust industry of interface design focused on scenarios that chunk tasks and behaviors into carefully segmented decision trees designed to abstract their use from any whiff of ambiguity. “Analysis,” “prototype,” “user feedback,” and “design” are locked into endlessly iterative cycles of “task specification” and “deliverables.”<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-25" id="chapter4_25" role="doc-noteref">25</a></sup> This language is not specific to interface theory, but derived from the more general platform of principles in the software engineering industry. By contrast, we need to consider a “subject” whose engagement with interface in a digital world could be modeled on the insights gained in the critical study of the subject in literary, media, and visual studies. A theory of interface for the humanities might well return to the work of Kaja Silverman, Paul Smith, Stephen Heath, Laura Mulvey, Margaret Morse, and the many other writer-theorists whose synthesis of structuralist and poststructuralist approaches created an understanding of enunciating and enunciated subjects (the speakers and the spoken in film and textual studies).<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-26" id="chapter4_26" role="doc-noteref">26</a></sup> A humanities theory of interface begins with the theory of the subject formulated by psychoanalytic, linguistic, and textual studies and their connection to theories of enunciation in which we learned that “we are spoken by the text” as much as we “speak” it.</p>
<p>But before we turn our attention to the design challenges involved in creating humanistic interfaces, a brief detour through a discussion of frames and framing devices is in order.</p>
</section>
<section epub:type="division">
<h2 class="head a-head"><samp class="SANS_ITC_Stone_Sans_Std_Semibold_B_11">Frame analysis</samp></h2>
<p class="noindent">Frame analysis, as outlined in the work of Erving Goffman, is particularly relevant to the study of a web environment.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-27" id="chapter4_27" role="doc-noteref">27</a></sup> We are constantly confronted with the need to figure out what domain or type of information or communication is being presented and what tasks, behaviors, or possibilities for engagement it offers. By itself, a typology of graphical elements does not account for the ways in which format features provoke meaning production in a reader or viewer. The cognitive processing that occurs in the relation between such cues and a viewer is not mechanistic. Graphical features organize a field of visual information, but the activity of reading follows the same probabilistic tendencies discussed in an earlier section. <span aria-label="101" id="pg_101" role="doc-pagebreak"/>These tendencies depend on embodied and situated knowledge, cultural conditions, and training, the whole gamut of individually inflected and socially conditioned skills and attitudes. Frame analysis is a schematic outline that formalizes certain basic principles of ways we process information into cognitive value—or go from stimulus to cognition. Filling in the details of ideological and hegemonic cues, or reading specific artifacts as a production of an encounter—the production of text (reading) and production of a subject of the text (reader)—is a process that depends on specific cases. But the generalized scheme of frame analysis puts in place a crucial piece of our model of interface. This is the recognition that any piece of perceived information has to be processed through a set of analytic frames that are grounded in cognitive experience in advance of being read as meaningful. We have to know where we are in the perceptual-cognitive loops—what scale the information is and what domain it belongs to—before we can make any sense of it at all.</p>
<p>In a networked environment, such as an iPhone, for instance, the literal frames of buttons and icons form one set of organizing features. They chunk, isolate, segment, and distinguish one activity or application from another, establishing the very basis of expectation for a user. Engagement in the interface is an ongoing process of codependent involvement. But reference “frames” are not exactly the same as these conspicuous graphical instances. Once we move away from the initial menu of options and into specific applications or digital environments, a user is plunged into the complex world of interlocking frames—commerce, entertainment, information, work, communication, etc. Their distinction within the screen space and interface depends on other conventions. For scholarly work, the ultimate focus of my inquiry, the relation among frames has some analogies to what are traditionally considered text and paratext. In a digital environment, those relations are loosened from their condition of fixity and can be reorganized and rearranged according to shifting hierarchies of authority and priority. A footnote to one text becomes the link to a text which can become the primary text in the next window or frame, and so forth.</p>
<p>The basic tenets of frame analysis depend on a vocabulary for describing relations (rather than entities). Frames by definition depend on their place within a cognitive process of decision making that sorts information along semantic and syntactic axes—reading the metaphoric value of images and icons as well as their connection to larger wholes of which they are a part. <span aria-label="102" id="pg_102" role="doc-pagebreak"/>In traditional frame theory, certain behaviors are attributed to relations between frames. A frame can extend, intensify, connect, embed, juxtapose, or otherwise modify another frame and perception. The terminology is spatial and dynamic. It describes cognitive processes, not simply actions of an autonomous user, but codependent relations of user and system. In invoking frame analysis as part of the diagrammatic model of interpretation, we have moved from a traditional discussion of graphical formats as elements of a <i>mise en page</i> to a sense that we are involved with a <i>mise en scène</i> or <i>système</i>. The shift here is from emphasis on features of layout, or graphic structure, to one that takes the conditions of production into account at a system level.</p>
<p>This puts us on the threshold of interface and a theory of constructivist processes that constitute the interface as a site of such cognitive relations probabilistically, not mechanistically. User behavior cannot be controlled or fully directed because users are subjects, individual and complex. Only by taking into full account the constructivist (created) process of codependence that is implicit in frame analysis can we move from a simple description of graphic features—as if they automatically produce certain effects—to a realization that the graphical organization only provides the basic structure of provocations for reading. The conditions constrain and order the possibilities of meaning production, but do not produce any effect automatically. In fact, as already suggested, the very term “user” needs to be jettisoned—since it implies an autonomy and agency independent of the circumstances of cognition—in favor of the “subject” familiar from critical theory. Interface theory has to proceed from the recognition that it is an extension of the theory of the subject, and then modify the engineering approach to interface that is so central to HCI practitioners.</p>
</section>
<section epub:type="division">
<h2 class="head a-head"><samp class="SANS_ITC_Stone_Sans_Std_Semibold_B_11">Constructed subjects</samp></h2>
<p class="noindent">Work by Donald Hoffman on perception as interface extended the constructivist approach to human cognition. In Hoffman’s analysis of experience he posited interface as the very site of construction. His “interface theory of perception” outlines perception as a constitutive act.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-28" id="chapter4_28" role="doc-noteref">28</a></sup> Countering the traditional idea that a species’ perceptual capacity is its ability to “address the true properties of the world, classify its structure, and evolve our senses to this end,” he suggests that perception is a “species-specific user interface that guides behavior.” Like the Chilean biologists Francisco Varela and Humberto <span aria-label="103" id="pg_103" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Maturana, Hoffman demonstrates that no experience exists a priori. The world and its reading come into being in a codependent relation of affordances. The new affordances of web-based reading are not distinct from this. They are not another order of thing, a representation already made and structured. They present a set of possibilities we encounter and from which we constitute the tissue of experience. The constitutive act, however, in this new environment, puts our bodies—eyes, ears, hands, heads—and our sensory apparatus into relation with rapidly changing multimedial modes. The integration of these into a comprehensible experience seems to have emerged intuitively, since the frames within frames of the web interface provide sufficient cues to signal the necessary shifts of reading modes.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-29" id="chapter4_29" role="doc-noteref">29</a></sup></p>
<p>Attending to the mechanics and logistics of interface continues to reify these elements in ways that do not fulfill the outlines of Hoffman’s vision. A more useful approach comes from theories of enunciation that consider all transactions as exchanges that structure subject positions. An interface is a space in which a <i>subject</i>, not a <i>user</i>, is invoked. Interface is an enunciative, or structuring, system. Texts and speakers are situated within pragmatic circumstances of use, ritual, exchange, and communities of practice.</p>
<p>The enunciative or structuring dimensions of a page identify who speaks to whom and in what orders of language and language modalities. We can see these features at work in most common interface environments, such as Google search results pages, but they are not conspicuously marked. Whose voice speaks in the menu of the Google-verse? The corporate entity of Google of course, but who or what does that mean? The very notion of “authorship” in Google is usefully problematic. Tracking the processes of design in the corporate web would reveal many threads of power, pressure, and contradiction. Porn, we notice, is not among the categories at the highest level of the Google menu, nor are games, gambling, or social networking. The “I” of Google who creates the “you” of the user of the search engine has already interpolated the subject into the structure of the page in such a way that certain desires and interests are subordinated, even stigmatized. Orders of graphic modality and enunciation organize an argument.</p>
<p>The top menu bar frames the Google world under a set of searchable categories. The sidebar, with its chronological order, is a log, a history in which the past disappears below and the present continually refreshes above the long tail of the past. A click on the “All results” timeline for a current theme or topic in the news gives a bar chart tracking an event that recently occurred. <span aria-label="104" id="pg_104" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Who identified the data that is displayed? After the fact? When? How does the historical trajectory of what is online match attention offline, and where is the full iceberg of the unrevealed narrative? The visual suggests a slow buildup to a present event, but what happens out of sight is not necessarily of lesser import or scale than the flurry of attention generated by the event. Because Google presumes to provide access to “everything” on the web, its enunciative modalities are markedly different from those of the delimited domains of digital humanities projects. But how do their rhetorics of visualization and presentation express an ideology? In every case, who speaks for whom, where, and how in these graphical and textual expressions? What is not able to be said in their forms and formats? What is excluded, impossible, not present, not able to be articulated given these structures? How can menu categories be altered to contrast one group of users’ habits with that of others? How do we get perspective on our own view? Point of view is structured into interface design but never exposed or marked conspicuously. To address these issues adequately, we need to turn to theories of enunciation.</p>
</section>
<section epub:type="division">
<h2 class="head a-head"><samp class="SANS_ITC_Stone_Sans_Std_Semibold_B_11">Enunciation</samp></h2>
<p class="noindent">The term enunciation is associated with the work of <span class="dcrit">É</span>mile Benveniste. In 1966 he published an article in which he outlined the basic principles of the theory of enunciation.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-30" id="chapter4_30" role="doc-noteref">30</a></sup> Drawing as it did on a long tradition of structural analyses, including work by Roman Jakobson and others with roots in Russian linguistics, “La nature des pronoms” (The nature of pronouns) succinctly formulated the generative and codependent structure of subject positions in discourse.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-31" id="chapter4_31" role="doc-noteref">31</a></sup></p>
<p>Benveniste’s debt to structural linguistics is evident in his analysis of the <i>exercise</i> and workings of language. The pronoun “I” always functions, in his analysis, as a link between the system of <i>langue</i> and the instantiation of <i>parole</i>, linking the two but only as a <i>locution</i>. The idea of locution depends upon the situation of utterance or expression being incorporated into the meaning of the text. The “I” has no semantic fixity, no single referential value. It does not stand for or represent any particular concept or entity and has to be understood situationally. (Again, echoes of the critical concept of <i>understanding</i> weave through here.) While Ferdinand de Saussure insisted that all linguistic elements are arbitrary and have no intrinsic meaning, the illusion of the representational structure of language persists in daily use. <span aria-label="105" id="pg_105" role="doc-pagebreak"/>The term “tree” attaches itself to images, ideas, and things in the world, even though the word “baum” or “arbre” serve equally well. But certain words in language are radically divorced from this illusion, these are pronouns and deictics, terms that can only be given value within the context of their use.</p>
<p>In this article, far-reaching in its influence, Benveniste argues for the specificity of pronouns in their structuring roles. The implications of this analysis for the critical engagement of power in discourse are profound and will be the basis of the discussion of information as enunciation that follows. Benveniste argued that the pronoun “I” identifies the speaking subject, the source of the discourse. But the I implies, and often directly states and uses, the “you” which is the term around which the “spoken” subject coheres. The spoken subject is formulated through address, through direct and indirect implication. Thus, “I is the individual who utters the present instance of discourse containing the linguistic instance <i>I</i>.”<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-32" id="chapter4_32" role="doc-noteref">32</a></sup> By taking the always implicit and often explicit situation of “address” into account, one has the symmetrical definition for <i>you</i>: “the individual spoken to in the present instance of discourse containing the instance <i>you</i>.”</p>
<p>Put simply, theories of enunciation, and the methods that arise from their formulation, make clear that any communicative expression is an act in which someone speaks to someone for some purpose through some structuring means that organize power relations as positionality. The I/you, we/they, you/others of speech acts are markers of enunciation. They identify the speaking subject and the spoken subject, the enunciated subject positioned by a discourse and constructed, in part, as a projection of it.</p>
<p>In the 1970s and 1980s, the concepts of the <i>speaking</i> and <i>spoken</i> subject of enunciation were applied to film, visual arts, architecture, and literary works in all genres and forms. But the artifacts and documents of information—charts, graphs, spread sheets, data formats and expressions—were only rarely, if ever, considered within this critical framework. The forms in which data are structured and presented rarely include any indication of speakership. Even when the contents are given author attributions, the structures themselves—spread sheets, repositories, interfaces, and visualizations—are not marked to expose the positionality structured into their communicative work. Visualizations appear as declarative statements, mere presentations of quantitative data.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-33" id="chapter4_33" role="doc-noteref">33</a></sup></p>
<p>An Excel spread sheet, a bar chart, and an interactive interface for query in a faceted browser are common forms within information discourse (where <span aria-label="106" id="pg_106" role="doc-pagebreak"/>the term discourse is a rubric that includes various modes of human expression including but not limited to or defined exclusively by linguistic ones—thus including, for example, filmic, visual, spatial, and physical modes of organized and systematic expression). In each of these the enunciation of subject positions can be systematically elucidated. What is at stake in this analysis is exposing the power structures built into the formal apparatus of the discourse formations that usually go unnoticed and unremarked.</p>
<p>How, then does an information visualization or interface work as an enunciative expression? In what sense can this formulation from Benveniste be used to explore the enunciative workings of interface: “Consciousness of self is only possible if it is experienced by contrast. I use <i>I</i> only when I am speaking to someone who will be a <i>you</i> in my address. It is this condition of dialogue that is constitutive of <i>person</i>, for it implies that reciprocally <i>I</i> becomes <i>you</i> in the address of the one who in his turn designates himself as <i>I</i>.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-34" id="chapter4_34" role="doc-noteref">34</a></sup></p>
<p>Who “speaks” an information expression or interface? Who is the spoken subject? Where in the various frames of content does an enunciative function get marked? Authorship goes unmarked on many levels in an Excel spread sheet or browser window—or even a research portal designed for scholarship or within a cultural institution. The structuring of its fields, naming of the rows and columns, semantic designations, and decisions about metric standards for quantitative entities are all authored activities. Beyond an attribute within the filename, or its visual expression contained in a letterhead, a logo, or its location, the spread sheet does not appear to embody the authorial entity of its making, nor of its intended “other” of reception. The browser window is so ubiquitous that we ignore the identity of its corporate sponsor-designers. We might ask the exact same question of a bar chart used to display the data in the spread sheet (or some subset of it) as we do of an interface or a literary text. Where, in the flat, two-dimensional appearance of a graph, flat to the screen on which it is displayed or isomorphic to the sheet of paper on which it is printed, does the inscription of point of view, subject positionality, appear?</p>
</section>
<section epub:type="division">
<h2 class="head a-head"><samp class="SANS_ITC_Stone_Sans_Std_Semibold_B_11">Critical interventions</samp></h2>
<p class="noindent">The feint of “unmarked” discourses is that they appear neutral, objective, unauthored, and appear to “speak themselves,” to use the language of 1980s deconstruction. Marked texts, those whose discourse positions are <span aria-label="107" id="pg_107" role="doc-pagebreak"/>framed explicitly, identify the situation and positions of the speaker, as G<span class="dcrit">é</span>rard Genette clearly demonstrated. But the face of the screen, its very <i>facingness</i>, is a dramatic embodiment of subject positionality. The information on the screen and the screen itself position the reader/viewer as the “you” of its expression. The plane of expression, the discursive field, on which a bar chart, graph, or even spreadsheet, is inscribed embodies an implicit mode of address. This is a demonstrative and declarative mode, direct in its address. The absence of marks of authorship as ownership or attribution, that is, the absence of signatures or identifiers within the text, is secondary to the absence of attribution on the structural level. But at the structural level, the relationship of enunciation is not only evident, it is overpowering. The facing screen performs an absorption of the gaze that veers between confrontational and consuming modes of engagement.</p>
<p>The structured relationship of the situation of viewing, to paraphrase a concept from film theory of the 1980s, can thus be analyzed as an aspect of display in a viewer’s engagement with a page, screen, or wall display. This is the most fundamental use of spatial relations as a way to create subject positions. The screen speaks. The viewer is positioned as the “you” who receives the “I” enunciation of the “speaking” screen. At the level of the artifact, the spread sheet and the bar chart (interface needs its own discussion on account of the many devices it uses to engage and produce a subject) are constructed according to graphical systems that imply an omniscient eye. They have no vanishing points; they appear to be spoken without any historically situated or culturally specific location or agent. This omniscient view is sometimes modified through the use of orthographic and/or axonometric conventions that activate a third dimension along a <i>z</i> axis without incorporating perspectival systems that identify the position of a producer and produced subject. The absence of perspective does not obviate the presence of point of view. Point of view is always present. An image, a graphic, or a statement—all are always produced from some place by someone who is positioned in, inscribed in, the structure of the image presentation (even if, as in the caveats above, that “someone” is a distributed, aggregate, collective, corporate, and otherwise non-individual entity). This is an inescapable aspect of human discourse.</p>
<p>The fact of point of view, the inescapable realization that it is present even in the extreme case of the unmarked text or graphic, then pushes the argument in two directions. The first is easy—to address the question of <span aria-label="108" id="pg_108" role="doc-pagebreak"/>why, then, data expressions, information formats, and their visualizations have so long been unrecognized as enunciative instruments. The answer is simple. The apparent neutrality and objectivity of such graphical expressions aligns them with the ideology of empirical sciences, as if a mere statement of quantitative fact, or of order and arrangement, had no rhetorical value in its own right, but merely served as a communicative vehicle for delivery of information. Discussion of the contrast between delivery/vehicular and constitutive/constructive models of communication has a long history in critical media studies and does not need review here. But the application of its principles to the analysis of information forms and formats is essential and useful.</p>
<p>The second direction is harder. What are the ways point of view and subject positions can be exposed? Can specific modalities of subject formation be shown, marked, within these graphical and formal expressions? Can it be made evident that they <i>are</i> enunciative expressions? If we recognize information expressions as enunciative systems, and are able to point to and demonstrate that they are spoken and speak a subject position, then does that do enough to push the arguments about information and/as enunciation? Or do we need to push further into the ways specific subject formations occupy particular locations within the power structures and regimes that subject us to their operation and controls? If we are produced as subjects of these systems, then they must be specific in each instance, and, as historical subjects, we occupy the relation to them differently, individually, even though we are spoken within their enunciative modes. Even as efforts at content moderation are being put into place, along with debates about their efficacy and ethics, the structuring apparatus of interface is being ignored.</p>
<p>At stake is the need to replace the unmarked activity of information expressions with a systematic critical attention to the “by whom for whom and for what purpose” interrogation to which they should, must, always be subjected. This is a simple hermeneutic move, a shift from reception of these expressions as merely declarative communications to a critical reading of them as rhetorical arguments shaped by the graphical features of their conventions. The size, shape, proximity, order, color, tone, and texture of graphical features are all features in the enunciative graphical system. As sure as tone of voice, inflection, volume, direction, and other aspects of what the twentieth-century semiotician Charles Morris identified as the <span aria-label="109" id="pg_109" role="doc-pagebreak"/>pragmatics of signs, are at work in linguistic enunciations, so the features of graphical systems are made use of in visual ones (including the apparently minimal graphicality of a spread sheet). All of these features help to position the speaking subject of the discourse within a historical, cultural, temporal, ideological location, and thus to demonstrate the assumptions built into the argument shape that speaks us as its subjects.</p>
<p>If we extend this discussion to the analysis of interactive interfaces, we begin to see the ways in which an even more explicit system of devices for engaging and producing a speaking and spoken subject are at work. The design of interactive interface, the search/query/filter repeat mode of engaging with data, provides an illusion that the structure provides the user with control. The settings in the query can be changed, customized, the search narrowed, the results of the query displayed for a specific purpose. The standard search engine, an n-gram viewer, a repository with a search engine and graphical display—any of these (I’m thinking of Google, Old Bailey, or the Voyant platform for text analysis) provides a set of features that can be clicked, slid, set, have values entered, or selections made. Each of these actions is embodied in an I/you dynamic. The speaker of the system, the “I” embodied in the design, allows “you” certain choices (and of course, by design and by the mere fact of the limits of design, not others). The user is positioned within a disciplining structure that has, in some instances, the appearance of an open-ended system. For a moment, the spoken subject can entertain the illusion of being the speaking subject. I might imagine that I am the author of a Google n-gram query, but of course, on examination, I realize that is not the case. The viewer, its algorithms, and the interface through which I actively engage are all positioning me as a spoken subject of these combined features. The illusion of control, even of authorship, is produced by the interaction with the features, the dials, input boxes, and so forth that all speak me as they speak to me. You, they each say, are the one who does this and not that, or that and then this, and so on. The subject position is enacted and produced.</p>
<p>An urgency and importance thus attaches to the need to address the specific workings of information as an enunciative system. Information—in its forms of expression, formats, and discourses—needs to be seen within a critical frame that strips its apparent declarative neutrality of the stance of self-evident objectivity. Information expressions need to be returned to the realm of discourse to be analyzed for what they are—statements of <span aria-label="110" id="pg_110" role="doc-pagebreak"/>ideological beliefs that obscure the partial, situated, culturally specific, historically located, and interested nature of knowledge and information as discursive processes.</p>
<p>Simon Penny’s useful term “inter-passivity” describes this kind of menu-driven engagement and the illusions it sustains. The designer creates environments that, increasingly, provide a sense of omnipotence. But we are always most deluded when most convinced of our capacity for agency. And the current vogue in click-and-participate forms of activism, social media, and platforms for the rapid registration of opinion are all means of interpellation, rather than fully empowering instruments. When we engage in an illusion, we allow our beliefs to be aligned with something outside of ourselves that we imagine or wish to be true. When we participate in a delusion we internalize that belief and situate ourselves within it. The design of environments of participatory activism raises questions about the model of agency on which it depends—and in what kind of communicative exchange the user-subject of these screens is engaged.<sup><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4-35" id="chapter4_35" role="doc-noteref">35</a></sup></p>
</section>
<section epub:type="rearnotes" role="doc-endnotes">
<h1 class="BMH1"><samp class="SANS_ITC_Stone_Sans_Std_Semibold_B_11">Notes</samp></h1>
<ol class="footnotes">
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_1" id="chapter4-1">1</a></span>. Brenda Laurel, ed., <i>Art of Human-Computer Interface Design</i> (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1990); Lori Spencer, <i>Reading Writing Interfaces</i> (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2014); Ben Shneiderman, <i>Designing the User Interface: Strategies for Effective Human-Computer Interaction</i> (Reading, MA: Addison Wesley, 1997); Alex Galloway, <i>The Interface Effect</i> (Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 2012); Matthew Fuller, <i>Behind the Blip: Essays on the Culture of Software</i> (Brooklyn, NY: Autonomedia, 2003); Steven Johnson, <i>Interface Culture: The Way We Create and Communicate</i> (New York: Harper Edge, 1997).</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_2" id="chapter4-2">2</a></span>. See Johanna Drucker, “Humanities Approaches to Interface Theory,” <i>Culture Machine</i> 12 (2011), 2.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_3" id="chapter4-3">3</a></span>. Ibid., 3.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_4" id="chapter4-4">4</a></span>. Jeff Han at TED, <a href="https://www.ted.com/speakers/jeff_han">https://www.ted.com/speakers/jeff_han</a>.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_5" id="chapter4-5">5</a></span>. Hayden Walles, “A Keyboard in the Palm of Your Hand,” <i>Sydney Morning Herald</i>, December 1, 2011, <a href="https://www.smh.com.au/technology/a-keyboard-in-the-palm-of-your-hand-20111129-1o4ut.html">https://www.smh.com.au/technology/a-keyboard-in-the-palm-of-your-hand-20111129-1o4ut.html</a>.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_6" id="chapter4-6">6</a></span>. Don Norman, <i>The Design of Everyday Things</i> (New York: Basic Books, 1990), and other work by Norman; Sachin Rekhi, “Don Norman’s Principles of Interaction Design,” <i>Medium</i>, January 23, 2017, <a href="https://medium.com/@sachinrekhi/don-normans-principles-of-interaction-design-51025a2c0f33">https://medium.com/@sachinrekhi/don-normans-principles-of-interaction-design-51025a2c0f33</a>; Pau Alsina, “PIPES Interface—User, Subjectivation, Materiality” (2015), <a href="https://interfacemanifesto.hangar.org/index.php/PIPES_Interface_%E2%80%93_User,_Subjectivation,_Materiality_-_Notes_By_Pau_Alsina">https://interfacemanifesto.hangar.org/index.php/PIPES_Interface_%E2%80%93_User,_Subjectivation,_Materiality_-_Notes_By_Pau_Alsina</a>, follows the outline, issues, and specific references of my argument, but includes some useful additions.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_7" id="chapter4-7">7</a></span>. Mukurtu, <a href="http://mukurtu.org/">http://mukurtu.org/</a>.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_8" id="chapter4-8">8</a></span>. The discussion here draws on Drucker, “Humanities Approaches to Interface Theory,” 1.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_9" id="chapter4-9">9</a></span>. This observation is based on using Google nGram to track the term. It does not have any apparent use before 1920, then climbs slowly with a rapid rise starting in the 1970s.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_10" id="chapter4-10">10</a></span>. Alsina, “PIPES Interface.”</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_11" id="chapter4-11">11</a></span>. For an overview of Engelbart’s contribution, see <a href="https://www.dougengelbart.org/content/view162/000">https://www.dougengelbart.org/content/view162/000</a>.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_12" id="chapter4-12">12</a></span>. For basic guidelines from the United States Government, see <a href="https://www.usability.gov/what-and-why/user-interface-design.html">https://www.usability.gov/what-and-why/user-interface-design.html</a>.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_13" id="chapter4-13">13</a></span>. As far back as the 1990s, concern about this topic surfaced among psychologists; see Kimberly S. Young, “Internet Addiction: The Emergence of a New Clinical Disorder,” <i>CyberPsychology and Behavior</i> 1, no. 3 (1998), 237–244.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span aria-label="188" id="pg_188" role="doc-pagebreak"/><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_14" id="chapter4-14">14</a></span>. This and the following section draw on Drucker, “Humanities Approaches to Interface Theory.”</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_15" id="chapter4-15">15</a></span>. Roger Chartier, “Languages, Books, and Reading from the Printed Word to the Digital Text,” <i>Critical Inquiry</i> 31, no. 1 (Autumn 2004), 133–152. See also Johanna Drucker, “The Virtual Codex: From Page Space to eSpace,” <i>Philobiblon</i> (2003), <a href="http://www.philobiblon.com/drucker/">http://www.philobiblon.com/drucker/</a>; Johanna Drucker, “From Entity to Event: From Literal, Mechanistic Materiality to Probabilistic Materiality,” <i>Parallax</i> 15, no. 4 (2009), 7–17.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_16" id="chapter4-16">16</a></span>. Geoffrey Nunberg, “The Places of Books in the Age of Electronic Reproduction,” <i>Representations</i> (1993); Roger Chartier, <i>L’ordre de livres</i> (Aix-en-Provence, 1992), 20.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_17" id="chapter4-17">17</a></span>. Brenda Laurel, <i>Computers as Theatre</i> (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1991).</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_18" id="chapter4-18">18</a></span>. Galloway, <i>The Interface Effect</i>.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_19" id="chapter4-19">19</a></span>. Patrick Jagoda on Alex Galloway, <i>LARB</i>, <a href="https://lareviewofbooks.org/article/the-next-level-alexander-r-galloways-the-interface-effect/#!">https://lareviewofbooks.org/article/the-next-level-alexander-r-galloways-the-interface-effect/#!</a>.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_20" id="chapter4-20">20</a></span>. Jesse James Garrett, <i>The Elements of User Experience</i> (San Francisco: New Riders, 2002), and the much-published image, <a href="http://www.jjg.net/elements/">http://www.jjg.net/elements/</a>.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_21" id="chapter4-21">21</a></span>. Aaron Marcus and Associates, “Cross-Cultural User Experience Design,” 2005, <a href="http://www-inst.eecs.berkeley.edu/~cs160/sp06/lectures/lec21/lec21.pdf">http://www-inst.eecs.berkeley.edu/~cs160/sp06/lectures/lec21/lec21.pdf</a>.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_22" id="chapter4-22">22</a></span>. Mauro Marinilli, “The Theory behind User Interface Design, Part One,” 2002, developer.com, <a href="https://www.developer.com/design/article.php/1545991/The-Theory-Behind-User-Interface-Design-Part-One.htm">https://www.developer.com/design/article.php/1545991/The-Theory-Behind-User-Interface-Design-Part-One.htm</a>.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_23" id="chapter4-23">23</a></span>. Electronic Literature Organization, <a href="https://eliterature.org/">https://eliterature.org/</a>.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_24" id="chapter4-24">24</a></span>. Drucker, “Humanities Approaches to Interface Theory,” 1 and 13; Ben Shneiderman, “Eight Golden Rules of Interface Design,” <a href="https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/article/shneiderman-s-eight-golden-rules-will-help-you-design-better-interfaces">https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/article/shneiderman-s-eight-golden-rules-will-help-you-design-better-interfaces</a>.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_25" id="chapter4-25">25</a></span>. A google search on HCI will turn up a host of examples of firms promoting their work with this rhetoric. See also the very funny Steve Krug, <i>Don’t Make Me Think: A Common Sense Approach to Web Usability</i> (San Francisco: New Riders, 2000), for a realistic critical approach to interface design.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_26" id="chapter4-26">26</a></span>. Kaja Silverman, <i>The Subject of Semiotics</i> (New York: Oxford University Press, 1983); Paul Smith, <i>Discerning the Subject</i> (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1988); Stephen Heath and Teresa de Lauretis, eds., <i>Cinematic Apparatus</i> (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1980); Laura Mulvey, “Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema,” in Leo Braudy and Marshall Cohen, eds., <i>Film Theory and Criticism</i> (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999), 833–844; Margaret Morse, <i>Virtualities: Television, Media Art and Cyberculture</i> (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1998).</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_27" id="chapter4-27">27</a></span>. Erving Goffman, <i>Frame Analysis</i> (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1974).</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span aria-label="189" id="pg_189" role="doc-pagebreak"/><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_28" id="chapter4-28">28</a></span>. Donald Hoffman, <a href="http://www.cogsci.uci.edu/~ddhoff/interface.pdf">http://www.cogsci.uci.edu/~ddhoff/interface.pdf</a>; Donald Hoffman, “The Interface Theory of Perception,” in Sven J. Dickinson, Ale<span class="dcrit">š</span> Leonardis, Bernt Schiele, and Michael J. Tarr, eds., <i>Object Categorization: Computer and Human Vision Perspectives</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), <a href="http://www.veronadesign.biz/interface.pdf">http://www.veronadesign.biz/interface.pdf</a>.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_29" id="chapter4-29">29</a></span>. This section draws on Drucker, “Humanities Approaches to Interface Theory,” 15; and on Johanna Drucker, “Performative Materiality and Theoretical Approaches to Interface,” <i>DHQ</i> (<i>Digital Humanities Quarterly</i>) 7, no. 1 (Summer 2013), <a href="http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/7/1/000143/000143.html">http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/7/1/000143/000143.html</a>.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_30" id="chapter4-30">30</a></span>. <span class="dcrit">É</span>mile Benveniste, “The Nature of Pronouns,” in Benveniste, <i>Problems in General Linguistics</i>, trans. Mary Elizabeth Meek (1966; Coral Gables, FL: University of Miami Press, 1971).</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_31" id="chapter4-31">31</a></span>. This and the following section draw on Johanna Drucker, “Information Visualization and/as Enunciation,” <i>Journal of Documentation</i> 73, no. 5 (2017), 903–916, <a href="https://doi.org/10.1108/JD-01-2017-0004">https://doi.org/10.1108/JD-01-2017-0004</a>.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_32" id="chapter4-32">32</a></span>. John Phillips, “Who Is the Subject of Enunciation?,” 2006, <a href="https://courses.nus.edu.sg/course/elljwp/enunciation.htm">https://courses.nus.edu.sg/course/elljwp/enunciation.htm</a>.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_33" id="chapter4-33">33</a></span>. Bernd Frohmann, “Discourse Analysis as a Research Method in Library and Information Science,” <i>Library and Information Science Research</i> 16 (1994), 133, 134; Bernd Frohmann, “The Power of Images: A Discourse Analysis of the Cognitive Viewpoint,” <i>Journal of Documentation</i> 48 (1992), 365–386; Mark Poster, “Databases as Discourse,” in E. Zureik and D. Lyon, eds., <i>Computers, Surveillance, and Privacy</i> (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1996); Michael Strangelove, “Poster on Database Discourse,” <i>Foucault Info</i>, April 8, 1997, <a href="https://foucault.info/foucault-l/msg02993.html">https://foucault.info/foucault-l/msg02993.html</a>.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_34" id="chapter4-34">34</a></span>. See Benveniste, “The Nature of Pronouns” (1966), 224–225, cited in Drucker, “Information Visualization and/as Enunciation.”</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="endnote"><span class="en_tx"><a href="chapter_4.xhtml#chapter4_35" id="chapter4-35">35</a></span>. See Johanna Drucker, “Design Agency,” <i>Dialectic</i> 1, no. 2 (2017), 11–16.</p></li>
</ol>
</section>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>